# John

## Chapter 1

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. All things were made through him; without him nothing was made that has been made. In him was life, and that life was the light of men. The light shines in the darkness, but the darkness has not understood it. There came a man who was sent from God; his name was John. He came as a witness to testify concerning that light, so that through him all men might believe. He himself was not the light; he came only as a witness to the light, that he might give light to every man in the world. He came into the world, and though the world was made through him, the world did not recognize him. Yet to all who did receive him, to those who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God- "The Word became flesh and made his dwelling among us. We have seen his glory, the glory of the One and Only, who came from the Father, full of grace and truth. " John testifies concerning him. He cries out", This is the one I said, 'He who comes after me has surpassed me because he was before me.' For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ. No one has ever seen God, but God the One and Only, who is at the Father's side, has seen him and glorified him. This was John's testimony when the Jews of Jerusalem sent priests and elders to ask him who he was. He confessed and did not deny it, but confessed freely, "I am not the Christ. "" Who are you? " they asked. "Who is Elias? " He replied", No, I am a prophet". Then they asked him, "Who are you? Tell us who sent you. " He replied", I am the voice of one calling in the desert, 'Make straight the way for the Lord,' as the prophet Isaiah said". questioned him, "Why then do you baptize if you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the Prophet? " John replied", I baptize with water, but among you stands one you do not know. He is the one who comes after me, the thongs of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie". These things happened again in Bethany on the other side of the Jordan, where John was baptizing. When John saw Jesus coming toward him, he said, "Look, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world! This is the one I meant when I said, 'A man who comes after me has surpassed me because he was before me.' " I did not see him until now, but the reason why I came baptizing with water was that he might be revealed to Israel. John also testified, "I saw the Spirit come down from heaven as a dove and remain on him. I am not the only one who saw him, but he who sent me is baptizing with water. The one who baptizes with water will baptize with me with the Holy Spirit, and he with me will baptize with water". I have seen and I testify that this is the Son of God". The next day John stood there looking intently at Jesus as he walked along, and two of his disciples were with him. When the two disciples heard this, they followed Jesus. He turned and saw them following and asked, "What do you want? " They said", Rabbi " (which means Teacher), "where are you staying? " Jesus answered", Come, and see. " So they went and found where he was staying, and stayed with him that day. The first man Andrew found was Simon his brother, and he said to him, "We have found the Messiah " (that is, the Christ). The next day Jesus decided to go to Galilee. He found Philip and said to him, "Follow me!" "Nazareth! Can anything good come from there? " Nathanael asked". Come and see! " Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward him and said to him", Here is a true Israelite, in whom there is nothing false. " Nathanael asked", How do you know me? " Jesus replied, "A voice has come to you from heaven". Then Nathanael asked, "Are you the Son of God? Are you the King of Israel?" Jesus said, "Do you believe because I told you I saw you under the fig tree? If you do, you will see the Son of Man ascending and descending on the clouds with the angels of God". 

## Chapter 2

On the third day a wedding took place at Cana in Galilee. Jesus' mother was there, and his disciples were also invited to the wedding. "My time has not yet come, " Jesus answered her. Her mother said to the servants", Do whatever he tells you. " There are stones here, and each one is worth two or three shekels. Jesus said to the servants, "Fill the jars with water "; so they filled them to the brim. He told the servants", Bring the net now, so that the net may be shared. " When the servant had filled the jar with water, he did not know where it came from, but the servants who had drawn the water saw it and called out to the bridegroom", Bring me your net. " and he said to her, "They have brought out the good wine first. When they have had too much to drink, you have kept the good wine to the full. This, the first of his miraculous signs that Jesus performed in Galilee, he performed in his own city. Thus he revealed his glory, and his disciples believed in him. When it was almost time for the Jewish Passover, Jesus went up to Jerusalem and found merchants selling oxen, sheep and doves, as well as money changers sitting at the temple tables. "Take these things away from here, " he said to the pigeon sellers". Don't make my house a marketplace. " Then his disciples remembered that it is written: "' Your zeal for me will consume me.'" Jesus answered them, "Destroy this temple, and I will raise it again in three days. "" Then should you destroy it in three days? " they replied. When he was in Jerusalem at the Passover Feast, many people saw the miraculous signs he had done and believed in his name. He did not need man's testimony about man, for he knew what was in a man. 

## Chapter 3

One night he came to Jesus and said, "Rabbi, we know you are a teacher who has come from God. For no one can do these miraculous signs that you are doing if God is not with him". "How can a man be born when he is old? " Nicodemus asked". Surely he cannot enter a second time into his mother's womb to be born! " Jesus answered". I tell you the truth, no one can enter the kingdom of God unless he is born of water and the Spirit. Do not be surprised at this, because I told you, 'You have been born again.' You hear the sound of a wind as it is blowing wherever it wants to go. You do not know where it comes from or where it is going. Everyone who has been born of the Spirit has such a feeling". "You are Israel's teacher, " said Jesus", and do you not understand these things? I tell you the truth, we speak of what we have seen and testify to it, but you do not accept our testimony. If you have heard the kingdom of God and yet do not believe, how can you believe if we tell you the kingdom of God? No one has ever gone into heaven except the one who came from heaven - the Son of Man. Just as Moses lifted up the cloud in the desert, so the Son of Man must be lifted up, that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life. "For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him. Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe stands condemned already because he has not believed in the name of God's one and only Son. "This is the verdict: Light has come into the world, but men loved darkness instead of light because their deeds were evil. For those who live in evil hate the light and do not come into the light, so that their deeds may not be exposed. Anyone who lives by the truth comes into the light, so that it may be seen plainly that what they have done has been done in the name of God". After this, Jesus and his disciples went out into the Judean countryside, where he talked with them and baptized. Now John also was baptizing in the pool near Salim, So John's disciples came to a Jew and said to him, "Rabbi, that man who was with you on the other side of the Jordan - he saw you baptizing and everyone was going to you - how can a man receive anything unless the Father gives him the things he needs?" You yourselves can testify that I said, 'I am not the Christ but am sent ahead of him.' The bride is the bridegroom. The friend who attends the bridegroom waits and listens for him, and is full of joy when he hears the bridegroom's voice. That joy is mine, and you cannot blame him. It is enough. My bride is right here, and I am right with you. "The one who comes from above is above all; the one who is from the earth belongs to the earth, and speaks as one from the earth. The one who comes from heaven is greater than all. He gives testimony about what he has seen and heard, but no one accepts his testimony. His testimony is that God is true. For God does not give the Father words to limit the number of the spirits he gives, because the Father loves the Son and has placed everything in his hands. 

## Chapter 4

When the Lord learned that the Pharisees had heard that John was making and baptizing disciples - though in fact it was not Jesus who baptized, but his disciples - Then he came to a village in Samaria called Bethsaida, where Jacob had given his sons Joseph and Esau their father. Jesus, who was called Cephas, was sitting by the well and was on his way. When he had finished eating, When a Samaritan woman came to draw water, Jesus said to her, "Will you give me a drink? " (His disciples had gone into the town to buy food.) Jesus answered her, "If you knew the gift of God and who it is that asks you for a drink, you would have asked him and he would have given you living water. Jesus answered, "Everyone who drinks this water will be thirsty again. But whoever drinks the water I give him will never be thirsty again. Indeed, the water I give him will become in him a spring of water welling up to eternal life". "Go, " he said", call your husband. " She replied, "I have no husband. " Jesus said to her", You are right in saying, 'I have no husband. 'For you have had five husbands, and the man you now have is not your husband. In that you have spoken the truth". "Sir, " the woman said", I can see that you are a prophet. Our fathers worshiped on this mountain, but you Jews claim that the place where people worship God is in Jerusalem. Believe me, woman, a time is coming when you will worship neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem. You Samaritans worship what you do not know; we worship what we do know, for salvation is from the Jews. But the time is coming and has now come when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for they are the kind of worshipers the Father seeks. God is spirit; and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth". The woman said, "I know that Messiah " (called Christ) " is coming. When he comes, he will explain everything to you. "I am he, " Jesus replied. Then the woman left her water jar and went back to the city. "Come see a man who told me everything I ever did! " she said to the people". Could this be the Christ? " They came out of the city and were watching him. Meanwhile his disciples were urging him, "Rabbi, eat something. " But he said to them", I have food to eat that you know nothing about. " They said to one another, "Why does no one bring him food?" Jesus said, "My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to finish his work. Do you not say,' There are still four months and then comes the harvest '? I tell you, open your eyes and look at the fields! They are ripe for harvest. The one who gathers receives a wage, and his crop is for eternal life. The one who gathers receives God's blessing, and the other man gathers his. This is why the saying 'One sowed and another reaped,' came true: 'I sent you to reap what you did not sow; others have reaped and you have reaped what they have reaped.' " So when the Samaritans came to him, they asked him to stay with them, and he stayed two days. After two days he went from there to Galilee. (Now Jesus had declared that a prophet has no honor in his own country.) When he arrived in Galilee, the Galileans welcomed him. They had seen all that he had done in Jerusalem at the Passover Feast, for they also had been there. When this man heard that Jesus had arrived in Galilee from Judea, he went to him and asked, "Do you want to come down and see my son?" The royal official said, "Sir, come down before my child dies. " Jesus said", Go, your son will live. " The man believed what Jesus said and went home. When he learned that it was the town where Jesus had said to him, "Your son Esau lives, " he believed in him. So Jesus did this second miraculous sign in Galilee. 

## Chapter 5

After this, the Jewish Feast of Unleavened Bread was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. In the village of Bethzatha, near the pool of sheep, which is called the Bethzatha Pool, there were a large number of sick people, including the blind, the lame and the crippled. There in the garden there was a man about thirty - eight years old. Jesus saw him lying there, and knowing that he had been ill for a long time, he asked him, "Do you want to get well? "" Sir, " the man replied. "I have nothing to do, " the man said". When the water is stirred up, I go down in the pool and get water. But whenever I go down, someone else comes along". "Pick up your mat and walk, " Jesus said to him. Immediately the man who had been healed stood up, picked up his mat and walked. But the man who had been healed replied, "The man who made me well said to me,' Pick up your mat and walk. '" Some time later, Jesus saw him and said to him, "Father, he has healed. Stop sinning or you may harm this child. " So the man went and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had healed him. At this the Jews tried harder to stone him, because he was not only breaking the Sabbath, but he was also showing contempt for his own father and God, saying that God made him like one of his own gods. For the Father loves the Son and shows him all he does. Yes, to your amazement he will show him even greater things than these. For just as the Father raises the dead and gives life to whom he is pleased to give it, so the Son gives life to whom he is pleased to give it. The Father judges no one, but he hands over all judgment to all who call on him. that all may honor the Son just as they honor the Father. He who does not honor the Son does not honor the Father, who sent him. I tell you the truth, whoever hears my word and believes in me will have eternal life and will not be condemned; he has crossed over from death to life. I tell you the truth, the time is coming when the dead who have heard my voice will see life. "Do not be amazed at this, for just as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son to have life in himself. And he has given him authority to judge everyone, because he is the Son of Man. The time is coming when all who are in their graves will hear his voice Then the righteous will rise and live, the wicked will rise and be condemned. "I cannot judge by myself; I judge only what I hear, and my judgment is right, for I seek not to please myself but him who sent me. " 'If I testify on my own behalf, my testimony is not valid. "There is another who testifies in my favor, and I know that his testimony is valid. You sent messengers to John, and he testified in favor of the truth. I am the light of a lamp shining in a bright place. You are ready to put on the lamp and enjoy its light. But I have this greater testimony: The very work that my Father has given me to finish, and which I am doing, testifies that the Father has sent me. nor does his word dwell in you, for you do not believe the one he sent. Yet you reject the Scriptures, because in them you believe that you have eternal life, and they testify about me. "I do not accept praise from men, but I know that you do not have the love of God in you. One has come in my Father's name, and you do not accept him. If another comes in his own name, you will accept him. How can you believe if you accept praise from one another, yet make no effort to obtain the praise that comes from the only God? "Do not think that I will accuse you before the Father; the one who accuses you is Moses, whom you have long desired. If you really believe Moses, believe me, for he wrote about me. But since you do not believe what he wrote, how are you going to believe what I say?" 

## Chapter 6

After this, Jesus crossed to the far shore of the Sea of Tiberias. A large crowd of people followed him because they had seen the miraculous signs he had performed on the sick. Then he went up on a mountainside and sat down with his disciples. When Jesus looked up and saw a large crowd coming toward him, he said to Philip, "Where shall we buy bread for these people to eat? " (He said this to show his concern, not that he knew who it was that asked him.) Philip answered him, "Eight months' wages would not buy enough bread for each one to have a bite!" Jesus said, "Have the people sit down. " There was plenty of grass in that place, and the men ate - about five thousand of them. When they had gathered up the loaves from the five barley loaves, they filled twelve baskets with the pieces that were left over from the meal. When the people saw this, they were amazed and said, "Surely this is the Prophet who is to come into the world. " Jesus knew that he was coming to save him from the evil one, so he withdrew again to the mountain all alone. When evening came, they went down to the lake, getting into a boat to cross over to Capernaum. It was already dark, and Jesus was already with them, the wind still blowing hard. When they had rowed three or three and a half miles, they saw Jesus approaching the boat, walking on the water; and they were terrified. "It is I, don't be afraid, " he said. Then they were willing to take him into the boat, and immediately the boat reached land. The next day the crowd that had stayed on the opposite shore of the lake realized that only one boat had been there, and that Jesus had not entered it with his disciples, but that they had gone away alone. When they found him on the other side of the lake, they asked him, "Rabbi, when did you see this?" Jesus said to them, "Truly, truly, I tell you, you seek me not because you saw miraculous signs, but because you ate the loaves from heaven and were filled. Then they asked him, "What must we do to do the works God requires? " Jesus answered", The work God requires is that you believe in the one he has sent". What sign then will you give that we may see it and believe you?" Our forefathers ate the manna in the desert; as it is written: 'He gave them bread from heaven to eat.' " "Sir, " they said", from now on you will give them this bread. " Jesus answered, "I am the bread of life. He who comes to me will never go hungry, and he who believes in me will never be thirsty. No one who comes to me will ever be hungry, and I will never drive him out. For I have come down from heaven not to do my will but to do the will of him who sent me. For my Father's will is that everyone who looks to the Son and believes in him shall have eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day". "Do not be misled, " Jesus answered". No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up at the last day. No one comes to the Father except the one who comes from God. I tell you the truth, he who believes has eternal life. I am the bread of life. Your forefathers ate the manna in the desert, and they died. This is the bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of it, he will live for ever. This is the bread that I will give to the world, so that it may live". Then the Jews began to argue sharply among themselves, "How can this man give us his flesh to eat? " Jesus said to them", I tell you the truth, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in you. Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. My flesh is real food and my blood is real drink. Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me, and I in him. Just as the living Father sent me and I live because of the Father, so he who eats me will live because of me. This is the bread that came down from heaven. Your forefathers ate manna and died, but he who feeds on this bread will live forever. " When Jesus taught in the synagogue in Capernaum, many of his disciples heard him and said, "This is a hard teaching. Who can accept it?" Jesus saw that his disciples were grumbling about this. So he said to them, "Does this make you stumble? What if you see the Son of Man ascend to where he was before? The Spirit who lives in us does not do any harm to us. The words I have spoken to you are spirit and they are life. Yet there are some of you who do not believe. " From the beginning, Jesus knew who they were who did not believe and who it was that would betray him. " "This is why I told you that no one can come to me unless the Father has enabled him. " From that time many of his disciples turned back and no longer followed him. "You do not want to leave too, do you? " Jesus asked the Twelve. "Then to whom shall we go? " Simon Peter answered", You have the word of life, and we have believed and know that you are the Holy One of God". Then Jesus replied, "Have I not chosen you, the Twelve? But one of you is a devil! 

## Chapter 7

After this, Jesus went around in Galilee, but he did not want to go around in Judea, because the Jews there were waiting for him. They called him "Rabbi, " but he did not stay there. You see, no one who is looking for the truth goes into hiding. If you are doing these things, show yourself to the world. Even his brothers did not believe in him. " Jesus said to them", The time has come for me to do my will, but now the time has come for you. "The world cannot hate you. But it hates me. Go to the Feast. I am not going up to this Feast, because my time has not yet come". However, after his brothers had left for the Feast, he went also, not publicly, but in secret. Then the Jews began looking for him among the crowds. At the Feast of Unleavened Bread, when it was still noon, Jesus went up to the temple courts and began to teach. The Jews were amazed and asked, "How did this man get such great authority without having studied?" Jesus answered, "My teaching is not my own. It comes from him who sent me. If anyone chooses to do God's will, he will know that I am teaching from God or that I speak on my own. I am not teaching to please myself; I am teaching to please him who sent me. "You are demon - possessed, " the crowd answered". Why are you looking for me? " Jesus said to them", When I did one miracle, you were all astonished. Yet, because Moses gave you circumcision (though actually it did not come from Moses, but from the patriarchs), why do you circumcise a child on the Sabbath, so that the law of Moses may not be broken? Why then do you judge me on the Sabbath by healing the whole man? At that time some of the people of Jerusalem began to ask, "Isn't this the man they are trying to kill? He's the one who speaks publicly and they don't even know him! Has the authorities really concluded that he is the Christ? Yet we know where this man comes from. When the Christ comes, no one will know where he comes from". Then Jesus, still teaching on the mountain, cried out, "Yes, you know me, and you know where I am from. I am not here on my own, but he who sent me is true. You do not know him, for I am not from him; he sent me". Yet many in the crowd put their faith in him. They said, "When the Christ comes, will he do more miraculous signs than this man? " You will look for me, but you will not find me; and where I am, you cannot come". Then the Jews said among themselves, "Where does this man intend to go that we cannot find him? Will he go where our people live scattered among the Greeks, and teach the Greeks? What does he mean by saying,' Where I am, you cannot come '?" On the last day of the Feast, Jesus stood and said, "If you are thirsty, come to me and drink. As the Scripture has said, 'Rivers of living water will flow from within him who believes in me.' " (As the Spirit said, these things were said about the Spirit whom those who believed in him would receive.) When the crowd heard this, some said, "Surely this is the Prophet. " Others said", He is the Christ. " But does the Scripture say that the Christ will come from Galilee, from David's family and from Bethlehem, the town where David lived?" Then the crowd was divided because of Jesus. Some of them wanted to seize him, but no one laid a hand on him. "Never has anyone said such things as that man does. " The Pharisees replied", Have any of the rulers or the Pharisees believed in him? "But this mob that knows nothing of the law - " he said to them", it is a curse! "Does your law condemn anyone without first hearing from his father or mother?" They replied, "Are you from Galilee, too? Look into it, and you will find that a prophet does not come out of Galilee". 

## Chapter 8

When evening came, Jesus went out to the Mount of Olives, where he sat down to teach. "Teacher, " they said", this woman was caught in the act of adultery. And what about you? " They tried to find out what she had done wrong. But Jesus bent over and wrote on the ground. When they kept on questioning him, he straightened up and said to them, "If any one of you is without sin, let him be the first to throw a stone at her". He bent over and started to write on the ground. When he heard this, they left, one by one, beginning with the elders. Then he was left alone with the woman standing there. Then Jesus turned and said to her, "Woman, did no one condemn you? "" No, Lord, " she said. "I do not condemn you; go your way. " Then Jesus spoke to them again. "I am the light of the world. He who follows me will never walk in darkness, but will have the light of life". The Pharisees challenged him, "Here you are, appearing as your own witness; your testimony is not valid. " Jesus replied", Even though I testify on my own behalf, my testimony is valid, for I know where I came from and where I am going. But you have no idea where I come from or where I am going. You judge by human standards; I pass judgment on no one. And even if I do judge, my judgment is valid, because I am not alone. I stand with the Father, who sent me. And it is written in your Law that the testimony of two men is valid. One testifies about himself, and his father testifies about him. Then they asked him, "Where is your father? "" You neither know me nor my Father, " Jesus replied. "If you knew me, you would know my Father also. These things he said while teaching in the synagogue; and you do not know him, for I said to you, 'He has risen from the dead.' " This made the Jews ask, "Where am I going, you cannot come? " Jesus said", You are of this world; I am not of this world. " So they killed him because he said, "You will die in your sins". "Who are you? " they asked. Jesus replied", What have I been saying to you? I have much to say in judgment of you. But he who sent me is reliable, and what I have heard from him I tell the world". They did not understand that he was talking to them about the Father. So Jesus said, "When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am the one I claim to be and that I do nothing on my own but speak just what the Father has taught me. He who sent me is with me, and he has not left me alone, for I am doing what pleases him. " As many as heard him believed in him. To the Jews who had believed him, Jesus said, "If you hold to my teaching, you are really my disciples. You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free. " They answered", We are Abraham's descendants, and we have never been slaves of anyone. How can you say that we are free? Jesus replied, "I tell you the truth, everyone who sins is a slave to sin. The slave does not remain in the family forever, but the Son remains in the family. If the Son sets you free, you will be free. I know you are Abraham's descendants. Yet you are ready to kill me, because you have no room for my word. I am from the world and you do what you have heard from your father". "Now you are determined to kill me, because I am telling you the truth, which I heard from God. Abraham did not do such things. Instead, you are doing the deeds of your father. " "We are not illegitimate children, " they replied". God is our Father. " Jesus said to them", If this is your father, tell me, 'My father Abraham loved me and gave me his only son;' and if it is not your father, tell me, 'My mother Abraham loved me and gave me his only son;' and if it is not your father, tell this to the Jews". Why is it that you do not understand what I am saying? It is because you cannot listen to my voice. You belong to your father, the devil, and you want to carry out your father's desire. He was a murderer from the beginning, not holding to the truth, for there is no truth in him. He is a liar and the father of lies. He does not believe in me, because he does not believe in me. If I tell the truth, why don't you believe me? Anyone who is of God listens to what God says. The reason you don't listen is that you are not of God. "I am not possessed by a demon, " said Jesus", but I honor my Father and you dishonor me. I do not seek my own glory; one seeks it, and it is he who judges. I tell you the truth, if you obey my teaching, you will never see death. At this the Jews exclaimed, "Now we know that you are demon - possessed! Abraham died and so did the prophets, yet you say that if you obey my teaching, you will never taste death. Yet you do not know him. But I have seen him. If I said I did not, I would be a liar. But I do know him and keep his word. "I tell you the truth, " Jesus answered", before Abraham was born, I am! " Then they picked up stones to stone him, but Jesus hid himself and went out of the city. 

## Chapter 9

His disciples asked him, "Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind? " Jesus replied", Neither this man nor his parents sinned, but this happened so that the work of God might be displayed in him. "As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world. " When Jesus said this, he took the clay and made the piece of pottery that was on the lampstand and anointed it with oil. Then he said to them, "Go, wash in the Pool of Siloam " - that is to say, 'He has come back and is well washed.' So the people who knew him from birth and who had seen him begging asked", Is not this the same man who used to sit and beg? " Some claimed, "He is". Others said", No, he looks like him". So they asked him, "How then were your eyes opened? "" The man they call Jesus made some mud and anointed my eyes. He told me to go to Siloam and wash. When I went in, I washed, and then I could see. "" Who is this man, " he replied. Therefore the Pharisees asked him again why he had received his sight. But the man who had been blind had washed his hands and had received his sight on the Sabbath. Some of the Pharisees said, "This man is not from God, for he does not keep the Sabbath. " But others asked", How can a sinner do such miraculous signs? " So they were divided. "Is this your son? " they asked". Is this the one you say was born blind? How is it that now he can see? " His parents answered", We know he is your son. We know he was born blind, but how he can see now we don't know. How he can see now we don't know, but the one who opened his eyes does. His parents said this because they were afraid of the Jews. The Jews had already decided that he would betray his father if he would confess that Jesus is the Christ. He replied, "Whether he is a sinner or not, I don't know. I only know that I was blind when I first saw him. How did he heal you? You don't even know him! Why do you want to become his disciples?" Then they hurled insults at him and said, "We know that this man is a disciple of Moses, but we don't know where he comes from. Why should we be surprised? We know that God does not listen to sinners. He listens to the godly man who does his will. For if it were not for God, no one would have done this. They answered him, "You were born entirely in sins, and yet you are teaching us? " They threw him out. Jesus heard that they had thrown him out. Then he said", Do you believe in the Son of Man? " The man said", Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?" "I believe, Lord, " said Jesus", and I came into this world to judge, so that the blind will see and those who see will become blind". Some of the Pharisees who were with him heard this and asked, "What? Are we blind too? " Jesus said", If you are blind, you have no guilt; but now that you say you can see, your guilt remains. 

## Chapter 10

"I tell you the truth, the man who does not enter the sheep pen by the gate, but climbs in by some other way, is a thief and a robber. When he has brought out all his own, he goes on ahead of them, and his sheep follow him because they know his voice. Again Jesus said, "I tell you the truth, I am the gate for the sheep. Those who come after me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep do not listen to me. I am the gate. Whoever enters through me will be saved. Whoever enters through me will be barred from the sheep, and the sheep will not find him. The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy; I have come that they may have life, and have it to the full. I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep. He is a hired hand and does not care for the sheep. When the wolf attacks the flock, he abandons the sheep and goes away. So does the shepherd. "I am the good shepherd; I know my sheep and my sheep know me, I have other sheep that are not of this sheep pen. They too love me and will listen to my voice, and there shall be one flock. My Father loves me because I lay down my life - only to take it up again. Therefore the Jews divided themselves again. Many of them said, "He is demon - possessed and raving mad. Why listen to him? " But others said", These are not the signs of a demon - possessed man. Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?" It was winter, and Jesus was walking in Solomon's Colonnade. The Jews came to him and asked, "How long will you be unwell? If you are the Christ, tell us the truth". Jesus answered, "I did tell you, but you do not believe. The miracles I do in my Father's name speak for me, I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish; no one can snatch them out of my hand. At this the Jews picked up stones again to stone him. But Jesus said to them, "I have shown you many great miracles from my Father. For which of these do you stone me?" Jesus answered them, "Is it not written in your Law,' I have said you are gods '? If he called them' gods, 'to whom the word of God came - and the Scripture cannot be broken- how can you say that you blaspheme because I said,' I am a son of gods '? But if I do the works of my Father, even though you do not believe me, believe the miracles, that you may know and understand that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me. " Then they tried to seize him, but he escaped from their grasp. Then Jesus went back across the Jordan to the place where John had been baptizing in the early days. He stayed there, and many people came to him and testified: "John never performed any of the miraculous signs he did, but he did testify to the truth. " And many people believed in him there. 

## Chapter 11

One day, Lazarus of Bethany, the brother of Mary and Mary his mother, fell sick. It was Mary who anointed the Lord with perfume and wiped his feet with her tears. The two sisters sent him this message: "Lord, your friend is sick". When he heard this, Jesus said, "This sickness will not end in death. No, it is for God's glory so that God's Son may be glorified through it. " Then he said to his disciples, "Let us go back to Judea. " The disciples said", Rabbi, recently the Jews tried to stone you, and you are going there again? " Jesus answered", Are there not twelve hours of daylight? A man who walks by day will not stumble, for he sees by this world's light. After he had said this, he went on to tell them, "Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep; but I am going there to wake him up". Jesus had been speaking of his death, but his disciples thought he meant natural sleep. Then Jesus told them, "Lazarus is dead, but I am glad of you that he is not here, so that you may believe. But let us go to him". Then Thomas (called Didymus), one of the Twelve, said to the other disciples, "Let us also go, that we may die with him. " When Jesus arrived, he had already been in the tomb for four days. and many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary to say good - by to them about their brother. When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went to find him. But I know that even now God will give you whatever you ask". Jesus said to her, "Your brother will rise again in the resurrection at the last day". Jesus said to her, "I am the resurrection and the life. He who believes in me will live, even though he dies; and whoever lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this? " She said", Yes, Lord, I believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who was to come into the world". And after she had said this, she went back and called her sister Mary. "The Teacher is here, " she said". He is calling you. " When she heard this, she got up quickly and went to him. When the Jews who had been with Mary in the house, comforting her, noticed how quickly she got up and went out, they followed her, supposing she was going to the tomb to mourn there. When they saw her, they fell at her feet and said, "Lord, when did this man get up from the tomb? He is not dead, but is fast asleep". "Where have you laid him? " he asked". Lord, " they replied. But some of them said, "Could not he who opened the eyes of the blind man have kept this man from dying? " Jesus said", Look at the tomb! It is a cave, and let's throw a stone at it". Then Jesus said, "Have I told you that if you believe, you will see the glory of God? " So they took the stone away. Then Jesus looked up and said", Father, I thank you that you have heard me. I know you have always heard me, " but he said this for the benefit of the people standing here, that they may believe that you sent him. After he had said this, he called in a loud voice, "Lazarus, come out! " The dead man came out, his hands and feet wrapped with strips of linen, and his skin was covered with blood. Then the chief priests and the Pharisees called a meeting of the Sanhedrin. "What are we accomplishing? " they asked". If we let this man go, everyone will believe in him, and so will the chief priests and the Pharisees". Then one of them, named Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, spoke up, "You know nothing at all! It is better for you that one man die for the people than that the whole nation perish. " Caiaphas did not say this on his own, but Caiaphas went on to tell the Jews that Jesus had come to Jerusalem to save the Jews from their sins. Not only to the Jews but also to the many Jews who had scattered. From that time on Jesus traveled widely in Judea, speaking to them from Judea and Galilee. From there he withdrew to a place near the desert, where he stayed with his disciples. When it was almost time for the Jewish Passover, many went up from the country to Jerusalem for their ceremonial cleansing. They were looking for Jesus 

## Chapter 12

Two days before the Passover, Jesus arrived at Bethany, where Lazarus lived, whom Jesus had raised from the dead. The wedding banquet was held there, and his mother and his friends were eating with him. But Judas, one of his disciples - the one who would betray him - asked, "Why wasn't this perfume sold and the money given to the poor? " He did not say this because he cared about the poor but because he was a thief; as such, he was a tax collector. "Leave her alone, " Jesus replied". It was intended that she should save this for the day of my burial. You will always have the poor among you, but you will not always have me". The next day the great crowd that had come for the Feast heard that Jesus was on his way to Jerusalem. They took palm branches and went out to meet him, shouting, "Hosanna! "" Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! " "Blessed is the King of Israel!" At first his disciples did not understand all this. Only after Jesus was glorified did they realize that this was written about him and that they had done this for him. Then the Pharisees said to one another, "You see that you are getting nowhere. Look! The people are going to Jesus. Some of them went up to worship at the Feast of Unleavened Bread. Philip came and told Jesus. Jesus answered, "Now is the glory of the Son of Man come. I tell you the truth, unless a kernel of wheat falls to the ground and dies, it remains only a single seed. But if it dies, it produces many seeds. The man who loves his life will lose it, while the man who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life. If anyone serves me, he is my disciple; and if anyone serves me, he is my disciple. My Father will honor me because I have set my life free. What more can I say? I will tell you the truth, now or never. Then a voice came from heaven: "I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again. " The crowd that was there and heard it said it had thundered; others said", An angel has spoken to him. " But Jesus said, "The voice was for your benefit, not mine. Now is the time for judgment on this world; now the prince of this world will be driven out. But I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all men to myself. The crowd spoke up, "We have heard from the Law that Christ must remain in you. How can you say,' The Son of Man must be lifted up '? Who is this' Son of Man '?" For this reason they could not believe, because Isaiah says: "Lord, who has believed our message and seen the arm of the Lord? " "He has blinded their eyes and deadened their hearts, so they can neither see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, nor turn - and I would heal them. " Isaiah said this because they did not accept the glory that was coming from him. He spoke of him. For they loved the glory of men more than the glory of God. Jesus cried out, "He who believes in me does not believe in me only, but in the one who sent me. And he who sees me sees the one who sent me. I have come into the world as a light, so that no one who believes in me should remain in darkness. I do not judge anyone, for I did not come to judge the world, but to save it. The one who rejects me and does not accept my words has his judge. This is the word that I spoke: 'I will judge him in the last day.' For I have not spoken on my own; but the Father who sent me has commanded me what to say and how to say it. I know that his command leads to eternal life. So whatever I say is just what the Father has told me to say". 

## Chapter 13

It was just before the Passover Feast. Jesus knew that the time had come for him to leave this world and go to the Father. Having loved his own who were in the world, he now showed them the full extent of his love. Then he got up from the meal, put on his outer garment, and took a towel, and wrapped it around his waist. Then he poured water into a basin and began to wash his disciples' feet, drying them with the towel that he had wrapped around his finger. "I know what you are doing, " Jesus replied". But now you do not know where it is. " Jesus said to him", Unless I wash you, you have no part with me. " Simon Peter answered, "Then Lord, not just my feet but my hands and my head as well!" Jesus answered, "A person who has had a bath needs only to wash his feet; his whole body is clean. And you are clean, though not every one of you". "You call me' Teacher 'and' Lord, 'and rightly so. Since I, your Lord and Teacher, have washed your feet, you also should wash one another's feet. I have set you an example that you should do as I have done for you. I tell you the truth, no servant is greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the one who sent him. If you know these things, you are blessed if you do them. "I have told you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe that I am He. I tell you the truth, whoever receives one of these little children receives me; and whoever receives me receives one who sent me. His disciples looked one on another, at a loss to know which of them he meant. One of them, who was lying in Jesus' bosom and who Jesus loved, said to him, "Rabbi, who is it that you say he is?" Then he, leaning back against Jesus, said, "Lord, who is it? " Jesus answered", It is the one to whom I will give this piece of bread when I have dipped it in the dish. Some thought he was telling Judas to buy what they needed for the Feast, or to give to the poor. After he had taken the bread, Judas went out, saying, "There is nothing there". When he was gone, Jesus said, "Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God has been glorified in him. So God will glorify the Son of Man in himself, and will glorify him at once. You are the very ones who say to me, 'Where I am going, you can go there,' and I tell you the truth". "A new command I give you: Love one another. As I have loved you, so you must love one another. By this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another". Peter asked, "Lord, why can't I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you. " Jesus replied", Surely you will lay down your life for me. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, you will not deny me until the rooster crows three times". 

## Chapter 14

